Let's continue with the Ionic grid layout because that Ionic grid is a crucial component that helps
you with composing your complex user interfaces and with composing, I mean ordering and layout in them.
The Ionic grid layout is all about three core Ionic components which you combine together and it uses the
CSS flexbox specification under the hood,
so in case you know see as as flexbox, by the way always a concept worth learning, for example my
Complete CSS Guide, if you know of that, then you have a good idea of what the grid does under the
hood. It abstracts the complexity away from you though, you don't have to write any CSS code to
use the grid.
Now how does it work?
As I mentioned, it's all about three components working together.
We always have this ion-grid component that wraps the entire area or that entire component tree which
you want to layout with the help of the grid.
Now it is important to highlight that you don't have to use the Ionic grid at all and you certainly
don't have to use it on every page you're creating,
you just want to use it whenever you want to layout items, not just top to bottom taking the full width
of the screen but when you want to restrict the width, when you want to have multiple items sit next
to each other or anything like that.
Now in your grid, you then have a couple of ion-rows because a grid thinks in rows. You can have as
many rows as you want and they don't have to be of equal height,
indeed you don't set the height explicitly, instead the height is determined by the content that goes
into the rows and each row is just as tall as its highest
child. You don't place your content right into a row though, instead the grid also requires columns to
turn it into a grid.
And now ion-col, that is actually the component which will then hold your content you want to place in
your grid because it's the combinations of rows and columns that makes up how your content is structured.
It allows you to structure your content across multiple columns and multiple rows and the columns can
be sized by you.
We already did this a bit in this course but now we'll learn all the details about how you can assign
different sizes for different device screens, so let's have a look. In our running application on the
discover places page here, we are using grid already.
This is our mobile view but if I untoggle this here and I go into the normal desktop view and I increase
the site width here a little bit, you'll see that this image becomes very large but still it does not
take the full width of the page because we're already using a grid here. We're using a grid which we
construct here with ion-grid and then ion-row and inside of the ion-row, we have a column and in that
column is our actual content and we control the size by setting a default size which you by the way
could omit because 12 is the default.
Why is it 12?
Because the Ionic grid thinks in 12 columns you can use to control the width of your items and by
default, if you only have one column, that will automatically take all 12 columns that are available,
if you have more than one column in one row, they will automatically split that into six columns each.
Here we have only one column in that row,
if you scroll down here we close that row and the column we close is still the same column we open up
here and then you can control the size for different breakpoints with these responsive attributes that
use the built-in breakpoint definitions.
Now let's explore our different options here with a little dummy grid
and for that, I'll go to offers and then a new offer page because here I have a blank screen which we
will later fill with some useful content but for now, this is perfect for playing around with the grid,
so let's do just that.
Let's go to offers, new offer and then there in the content,
let me remove that padding and in here,
let's add an ion-grid. Now as I mentioned, the ion-grid then needs at least one ion-row and in that ion-row,
you add your column.
Now to make it a bit easier to see which size a column occupies,
I'll go into the scss file here and give the ion-col selector here some styling.
Now since we're using Angular here, the styles we assign to ion-col here in this scss file will only
apply to ion columns used in this component.
Now here I want to give them a border of one pixel solid and red. If I do that and I then also add some
content here like row one, column one, then let's save this and let's wait for this to reload, login,
offers and here it is and by the way to speed this up a little bit,
I'll go to my auth service and set user is authenticated to true so that we are logged in by default
and if I now reload, we automatically start on this page and I don't have to navigate back here.
So what we can see is that by default, this takes the full available width of this page, just a little
bit of padding which this grid automatically adds and which you by the way can get rid of by simply adding
no-padding
and with that if I now save this, you will see it reloads here and now it actually takes the full width
and there is no padding left.
So that is a setting you can add in case you want to take that full available space, for example for
showing a big image at the top of the page,
I will remove that because I want to have a padding but still what we can see even with that padding
generally, this one row with that one column takes the full width and that is what I meant.
If you add an ion column, by default it takes the full available 12 columns.
Now with that, let's actually add 12 columns.
So let's add a second column here, in this first row still,
we don't add a new row because in that same row, I want to have a new column and you can have different
columns in every row. Let's add column three, four and so on and I'll quickly fill this up all the way
to 12, so that we can see all 12 columns here in action,
so here's 10, 11 and 12.
Now with that saved, what you will see as this reloads is that here we have our 12 columns sitting next
to each other in that row and they take up the full width and they distribute the available space equally.
If we add a new column, a 13th column here, that actually still fits in but we're now reaching a point
where the grid is not optimized for and where also your response of breakpoints will not be usable in
a perfect way,
so you should restrict yourself to twelve columns and to be honest, you very rarely have layouts where
you would need more than 12 items in the same row.
Now of course if you go to a small device, you see here we get a problem because we still try to squeeze
12 items into one row and you can see that automatically, a break is added here and the line wraps at
the point of time where it can't shrink the items anymore since the lowest amount that it can shrink them which
it does automatically
is that the row fits in there,
the word row and it wouldn't be able to shrink that anymore because it can't wrap it into a new line
and therefore it now starts wrapping the items into new lines,
still it then takes up the full width. So this is how this generally works with the columns thing
but of course you rarely use twelve columns and you've got many options for configuring how broad your
columns should be in case you're using less than 12 columns because the far more common use case is
not that you want to have twelve items sit next to each other but that you have a couple of items that
should be broader than one column.